---
layout: post
title:  "Quotes"
date:   2015-08-17
categories: philosophy
---

Hello fellow readers,  
In this post I'll explain some of my current favorite [quotes](http://venam.nixers.net/quotes.txt) and why I love them.

I apologize in advance to non-French speaker as there are some quotes in French.
I'll still try to translate and explain them in the most respectful fashion.


-------------------


> Haste Makes Waste.


There's no author to this sentence. It's just an old saying.
If you rush through your ideas without thinking straight you'll certainly fail
or have different results than expected. You'll be driven by your
subconscious and confusion will rise.


You'll waste your time and effort for nothing. Probably because of the fear of loosing
what you suddenly found.


What I believe is that you can't solve anything without a plan. Planning
takes time but the ROI (Return On Investment) is worth it. If someone is
able to react fast to solve problems when facing them it's certainly
because they've trained to do so. No first try is a best try.

Would you trust a fireman if he didn't train, would you trust anyone for any job
if they are never prepared for anything.


When you want to achieve something you gently and slowly move towards your goal
following your carefully planned map. You wait actively.


-------------------


> Never be satisfied, that's the way you'll fall short. See past yourself.


Like I mentioned in other posts, I think there's a majority of _sleeping_
people amongst us. They are simply satisfied with how their life moves.


NO, that's when you are satisfied that you don't raise higher.


There's also a metaphor in the quote. It compares the body with the expectations.
Your expectations should transcend your body, that's what you should aim for.


If someone tells you that it's not sane and that it only leads to unhappiness you
then reply, "I'm not satisfied but I'm happy of what I'm achieving at the moment, of my fights and my losses."


It's strange but it's my un-satisfaction that brings my happiness.


I've read that sentence in a comic book.


-------------------


> The best writing is rewriting.

- Elwyn Brooks "E. B." White


There are two interpretations to this quote.


The first is the ironic one. Saying that there's no easier way to write then
to erase and restart from the beginning. It's the best way to write. It's has the least constraint.


The second interpretations is that most of your work is about polishing what you've
started. That no good literary work is made on a first draft.

You write once and spend the rest of your life rewriting until the message is clear.


-------------------


> Never wrestle with a pig. You'll both get dirty and the pig likes it


As I've mentioned in multiple of my post, a lot of people are sleeping through
their life.

Some of the sleepers are annoying, they drag you down in their drowsiness.
They nag about you raising up, they want you to be a sleeper just like them,
to fit in the crowd.

Once you can confirm that they are the pig type, don't let them affect you.


-------------------


> For even better randomness, let your cat walk on the keyboard.

- from the Advanced Linux Programming book


Another great ironic quote. In the world of computing there's no true randomness,
there's only pseudo-randomness. The author tries to introduce a factor from the
real world into the equation, a factor that might seem unexpected. However,
even in real life there's no true randomness.


It appears random because we can't grasp the concepts yet.


-------------------


> No matter how it looks at first, it's always a people problem.


We are human beings. Our problems revolve around our race, even if it might not
seems like it.

This quote is a reminder.


-------------------


> Are they smart? Do they get things done? Do I want to spend a lot of time around them?

- Sam Altman


This doesn't need much explanation. If you want to work with someone just ask
yourself those basic questions.


-------------------


> Does the tournament make sense as you keep going?


You've reached the top of the top amongst million of persons trying but you
keep fighting to go higher. What's the point? To who are you proving yourself
if you are already at the goal. You've already proven your value. Just keep
your place but don't get enticed by the tournament.


-------------------


> When a relationship isn't going well, don't do more of the same; try something different.


I would only apply this quote to relationships that are worth it. Relationship
that makes you grow. Usually you don't change your value. Once set you find
people who go along with them.

-------------------

> A relationship will make you more of what you already are.
> A relationship will make you more then you are.


> Like self-esteem attracts like self-esteem.


This is related to the previous one. This means exactly what it says. If you
are currently down in your life a relationship will only attract people of the
same kind and dig you deeper in your grave.

If you are in the opposite situation, your relationships will attract the
most fabulous persons and they'll help you in your journey.


-------------------

> In any relationship, the person with the most power is the one who needs the other the least.


Also related to the previous quotes. It only applies to people you deeply care
about or that deeply care about you.

For example, if you are a valuable assets in your company and you have the possibility to
leave at any moment that gives you immense power.


-------------------


> The less confident you are, the more serious you have to act.


Yet another ironic quote. I know a lot of people that try to act like they are
someone else, this quote is my reference to them. Frauds are frauds.


-------------------


> When a thing looks complicated, it's possible that we're looking at it wrong and missing some of the pieces of the puzzle.


It's _possible_ but in 1% of the cases it's not.

Complicated might be easy to understand.  
Simple might be hard to understand.


-------------------

> We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act, but a habit.


You might be a God inside your head but to others you are only what you do, your
sweet talk accounts to nothing.

If you want to reach excellence you have to build yourself everyday until it's
built-in. When it's settled inside that's when it can affect others, it'll appear
to them as if what you do is innate.


-------------------

> No == "can't you be more creative than that?"

If someone says 'no' to your inquiry it's because you've asked them the wrong
way. Try again another time, another way.


-------------------


> Don't worship them and they'll worship you


More ironic quotes. You shouldn't care about what others think of you and if
you don't care then there's no point in wanted them to worship you.


-------------------

> I woke up this morning and discovered that everything in my apartment
> had been stolen and replaced with an exact replica.  I told my roommate,
> "Isn't this amazing?  Everything in the apartment has been stolen and
> replaced with an exact replica."  He said, "Do I know you?"


Just a funny recursive joke.


-------------------


> Even now my voice is reaching millions throughout the world, millions of despairing men, women and little children, victims of a system that makes men torture and imprison innocent people.
> To those who can hear me, I say, do not despair.
> The misery that is now upon us is but the passing of greed, the bitterness of men who fear the way of human progress.
> The hate of men will pass, and dictators die, and the power they took from the people will return to the people and so long as men die, liberty will never perish.
> Soldiers! Don't give yourselves to brutes, men who despise you, enslave you, who regiment your lives, tell you what to do, what to think or what to feel!
> Who drill you, diet you, treat you like cattle, use you as cannon fodder.
> Don't give yourselves to these unnatural men, machine men with machine minds and machine hearts!
> You are not machines! You are not cattle! You are men! You have the love of humanity in your hearts.
> You don't hate! Only the unloved hate, the unloved and the unnatural!
> Soldiers! Don't fight for slavery! Fight for liberty!
> In the 17th Chapter of St. Luke it is written: "the Kingdom of God is within man", not one man nor a group of men, but in all men!
> In you! You, the people have the power, the power to create machines.
> The power to create happiness! You, the people, have the power to make this life free and beautiful, to make this life a wonderful adventure.
> Then, in the name of democracy, let us use that power!
> Let us all unite! Let us fight for a new world, a decent world that will give men a chance to work, that will give youth the future and old age a security.
> By the promise of these things, brutes have risen to power, but they lie!
> They do not fulfill their promise; they never will.
> Dictators free themselves, but they enslave the people!
> Now, let us fight to fulfill that promise!
> Let us fight to free the world, to do away with national barriers, to do away with greed, with hate and intolerance.
> Let us fight for a world of reason, a world where science and progress will lead to all men's happiness.
> 
> Soldiers! In the name of democracy, let us all unite!

- Charlie Chaplin


Chaplin is amazing. He directed, produced, wrote, composed the music, and starred
in _The Great Dictator_.

The quote is breathtaking it gives you faith in humanity.


-------------------


> Some example of how this works in practice. I've always used restaurants as the example of a terrible business. There's alway some example...
> You're opening a restaurant business and no one wants to invest because  you just loose money so you have to tell some idiocy sincrotic nerded 
> and you'll say something like "Well, we're the only British food restaurant in Paoelto.
> So it's British, Paoelto, and of course that's too small market because people may be to drive all the way to Manhatan View or either Mountain wall park 
> Hmm, and there probably are no people who eat nothing but British food at least no people who are still alive.
> And so, that is a sort of a fictitiously narrow market.
> There's sort of a Hollywood  version of this where the way movies always get passed...
> Ok, it's like College football star ...
> joins elite group of hackers...
> to catch the shark that killed his friend.
> So, that's a movie that has not yet been made but the question is "Is that the right category" "Is the correct category".
> It's just another movie! In which case, there's a lot of those, it's super competitive, incredibly hard to make money, no one ever makes money in Hollywood.

- Paypal founder, Peter Thiel

A harsh quote to put you back on track when you're dreaming about non-sense
projects.


-------------------


> If you cannot tell a story with your science, your science isn't worth a shit.
> I'm 63 and I think back on what is important in my life.
> I wish I would be a better man.
> I wish I had been a better husband and a better citizen.
> But I have told a certain story with my life, and, probably the most
> interesting aspect of that story are the discoveries that I've made in the
> science lab the contribution I have made to the understanding of how man is put together.


- Kari Stefansson

If you're not doing what you like to do then obviously you'll never be able to
tell stories about it. You won't get inspired by it, you'll get bored of it.


-------------------

> "Busyness" is a social defense against other people making us do things we don't really want to 
> do and a mechanism for coping with feeling guilty about things we know we should do, but don't. 
> 	My intuition is that people have had to project themselves as busier and busier over the 
> 	last couple decades as technology has made us more efficient in order for this strategy to 
> 	continue working.
>
> If you're always "so busy!", your boss is less likely to give you more work; your spouse is 
> less likely to ask you to do more around the house; you're not going to feel as guilty about 
> only seeing grandma once a year or refusing to help your friend move; you can feel a little better 
> about yourself when a friend lands an awesome new job or plans a cool vacation and you haven't 
> really done anything. When you haven't seen someone in a long time and they ask how things are, 
> you can give them the impression that things must be even better than the last time you saw them, 
> because you've clearly been so busy improving your lot in life. Well, that's the idea, at least.
>


Yet just another reminder of how some people act.


-------------------


> I can't help but wonder whether all this histrionic exhaustion isn't a way of covering up the 
> fact that most of what we do doesn't matter.

Same as above quote.


-------------------


> Reading and experience train your model of the world. And even if you forget the experience or what you read, its effect on your model of the world persists. Your mind is like a compiled program you've lost the source of. It works, but you don't know why.

- Paul Graham

I love that quote. Events might disappear from memory but the touch of them,
the change in your personality coming from them, sticks.


We are constantly changing beings.


-------------------


> Those who have never been hurt don't truly understand what love is. Those who
> endure hardships become strong and gentle. This path is necessary.


Taking everything for granted is the worth mistake. You acknowledge the value
of sentiments once you've felt a plethora of them.


Otherwise, how would you make the difference. You've got no appreciation.


-------------------


> In an ugly and unhappy world the richest man can purchase nothing but ugliness and unhappiness. 


That's why we should work to make the world a better place.


-------------------


> It's all the same, only the names will change

Most of life is a cycle. There are moments were I swear that I've lived before,
those déjà vu.


-------------------


> Quand je me regarde dans cette glace, j'entrevois un homme différent qui
> affiche les entailles d'un passé tourmenté. Je me demande ce qu'est devenu
> cet homme heureux. Un rêve disparu, volatiliséomme lorsqu'on casse la glace
> de l'armoire de pharmacie. La vie ne m'a pas appris beaucoup, si ce n'est
> qu'il existe pas plus fragile que soi devant son propre reflet. Nais-je
> donc qu'une image et TOI mon miroir?

- Allen Coté

There was a weird dude one day that asked me what I see in the mirror when I
stare. This quote is quite philosophical and hard to translate but that's the
answer I should have given him.

I might write a post about my mini adventures soon.


-------------------

> On se regarde de temps a autre comme on regarde sa montre pour s'assurer
> que le temps passe. Et le temps passera.

- Sylvie Demers

Translated:
> We look at each others, from time to time, like we look at our watches, to
> be sure that the time passes. And the time will pass.


Pretty much related to my talk about sleeping people and their passivity.


-------------------


> Il faut avertir avant d'observer une minute de silence sinon l'on croit que
vous faite simplement vous taire...


-------------------

> J'avais devant moi un homme heureux, dont le rêve le plus intime avait été
> exaucée la manière la plus évidente, qui avait atteint dans la vie le but
> qu'il s'était proposé, obtenu ce qu'il désirait, et qui était satisfait de
> son destin et de lui-même. Déja auparavant, a mes pensé sur le bonheur
> humain venait toujours s'ajouter, je ne sais pourquoi, quelque chose de
> triste; mais maintenant a la vue de cet homme heureux, je me sentais envahi
> par un sentiment pénible, proche du déspoir...Je pensais:comme il y a,
> somme toute, un grand nombre de gens contents, heureux! Comme c'est une
> force accablante! Regardez donc la vie: insolence et oisivetées forts,
> ignorance et bestialitées faibles, rien qu'une misère intolérable,
> étouffante, rien qu'une dégénérescence, une ivrognerie, une hypocrisie,
> un éternel mensonge... Et a cotée de cela, dans toutes ces maisons, dans les
> rues, c'est le silence, le calme. Parmi les cinquante mille habitants de cette
> ville, pas un seul qui pousse un cri d'alarme, de révolte. Nous voyons tous
> ceux qui vont chercher leurs provisions au marché et qui le jour mangent,
> la nuit dorment; ceux qui racontent leurs sottises, se marient, vieillissent,
> trainent avec placidité leurs morts au cimetière. Mais, nous ne voyons pas
> et n'entendons pas ceux qui souffrent, et tout ce qui est effrayant dans la
> vie se dégueule quelque part dans les coulisses. Tout est calme, paisible,
> et seules protestent les muettes statistiques: tant d'hommes sont devenus
> fous, tant de seaux de vodka bus, tant d'enfants morts d'inanition. Et cet
> ordre des choses est apparemment nécessaire; apparemment, l'homme heureux ne
> se sent bien que parce que les malheureux portent leur fardeau en silence,
> et que, sans ce silence, le bonheur serait impossible. C'est une hypnose
> génerale. Il faudrait que derrière la porte de chaque homme satisfait,
> heureux, se tienne quelqu'un armé'un petit marteau dont les coups lui
> rappelleraient sans cesse que les malheureux existent, que si heureux qu'il
> soit, la vie lui montrera tôt ou tard ses griffes, le malheur, la maladie,
> la pauvreté, les deuils, viendront s'abattre sur lui, et que personne a ce
> moment-la ne le verra ni ne l'entendra, comme lui maintenant n'entend et ne
> voit personne. Mais l'homme au marteau n'existe pas, l'homme heureux vit,
> les petits soucis quotidiens l'émeuvent légerement, comme le vent fait bouger
> les feuilles du tremble et tout continue comme par le passé

- Anton TCHEKHOV

Translated:

> I had in front of me a happy man, a man which the deepest dream had taken form
> in the most evident way, a man which had accomplish all the goals he had set
> himself to reach, obtained all that he desired, satisfied of his destiny and
> of himself. Already, in the past, when I thought of human happiness, there
> always was, I have no idea why, some kind of sad feeling; but now, in the
> sight of that happy man, I felt invaded by this annoying feeling, close to
> despair...I thought: Overall, there's a great amount of people that are content,
> happy! It's an overwhelming force! You all should look at life: You insolent
> fools, ignorant and weak beasts, just a suffocated intolerable misery, just
> a degeneration, a drunk hypocrisy, an eternal lie...And on the side of that
> , inside every house, on the streets, it's silent, it's calm. Among the
> fifty thousands residents of this city none suddenly raise a shout as an alarm,
> a shout of revolt. We see all those that go get their groceries to the supermarket
> and eat during the day, sleep the night; those who tell dumb stories, those
> who get married, get old, and placidly drift their dead to the cemetery.
> But we don't see, nor hear those who suffer, and all that frighten us in life
> is puked somewhere behind the scenes. Everything is calm, peaceful, only the
> silent statistics protest: this amount of men have gone crazy, this amount of
> vodka has been drank, this amount of kids died of starving. And this order of
> things is apparently necessary; Apparently, the happy man only feels good because
> the unhappy ones lift their weight alone in silence, and without that silence,
> the happiness wouldn't be possible. It's a global brainwash. There should be
> behind the door of every satisfied and happy man another man armed with a hammer
> that would hit him to remind him constantly that the unfortunates exist, that
> if he's happy now life will strike him sooner or later with grief, sickness,
> poverty , death, and at that moment no one will hear his cries of despair, just like
> he doesn't hear nor see anyone. But the man with the hammer doesn't exist,
> the happy man lives and his little wannabe everyday worries slightly frighten
> him, like the wind make the leaves of the aspen shiver. And everything continues
> just like it's always been.

A beautiful quote which I can't agree more with. It talks about the blindness
of happy zombie people going through their lives inside their own happiness
bubble.

I've talked about this before and I'll continue to talk about it.

I'm preparing another post that'll discuss this in more depth.


-------------------

> Il faut éviter les étapes de la vie comme ço on vivra plus longtemps...

Translated:

> You should avoid life stages this way you'll live longer

- Patrick LOUIS

This quote is mine. I've kept that mindset that following straight path is bad,
that it leads to a boring end. I'd rather take the risk and go my own way.
