---
layout: post
title:  "The People I can't Stand"
date:   2016-01-27
categories: psychology
---

This post is an explanation of why I don't deal with certain people, or act
with them in other ways, or completely cut ties with them.

I present in the order they annoy me:

* Clueless

The people who gets themselves into situations, usually related to some work
they should be able to do, but have no idea what they are doing.

You are suppose to know this certain thing at this stage in life, you are a
full grown up dammit!

* Followers

Mindless and brainwashed here comes the followers. Without any coherent reason
they believe their doctrine.

Get your things straight instead of being a dog, dammit!

* Low lives

Soulless they wander around, lower than a follower. What they do, they don't know,
what they say, they don't know. Those individuals are predictable animals.

If you follow a straight path in life you are no different than a cow going to
the butcher, dammit!

* Fakers

Persons that like the smell of their own poo. They are so self-centered they
try to raise themselves up by tricking themselves into believing they are more
than they are.

You're plastic fake, dammit!

* Special snow flakes

A step beyond the last section, the special individuals. Very special indeed,
they are more fake than fake; They think they've got royal privileges!

You eat, poop, and sleep like everyone else, go back to your farm and eat some grass
dammit!

* People who only talk about their work

They've reached a level of delusion where the brainwash has made them think that
working for someone else *is* their entire life.

Work is boring to others, don't talk about it with them dammit!

* People who only talk about what others do

So you've lost hope in your own life, you've understood you are a zombie walking around.
But now you've got to interject in the lives of others.

Wash your own anus before scrubbing and inspecting the ones of others, dammit!

* Naggers

A type extremely popular amongst female, the naggers.
They have to comment on how things are wrong in details at every single opportunity.
It seems like they only do that for fun to annoy you.
Most of the time it's a non-stop noise coming from their mouth.

> nananah nahnahana and nahanahanahanaha. Why haven't you nanana ananaan. And it would be better to nananana. Where's the nananaa. Why the nananananana

Here's the door if you wanna nag, dammit!

* Downers

They are sad and lonely, the world is crumbling over them. No, it's not their
fault. Please help! Why is this only happening to them, why is life so hard.

Everyone has problems, we overcome them, that's what life is about dammit!

* Problem creators

After drowning and dying as a downer you become a problem creator. You build
your own business of problems creation by mixing yourself with a nagger and others of the above.
Instead of lifting yourself up you are creating more shit for yourself.
What a cathartic feeling it should be.

Stop! Think about what you've done so far and realize what you need to do to
get back on track dammit!

* Destroyers

Those people just don't appreciate what others spend years to build.
Most of the time those are brainwashed people, manipulated into doing those
atrocities.

You are the infection of society, you belong in prisons dammit!

* Parasites

They lost all hope in themselves as individuals that will contribute to other beings
on earth. Consequently, to stay alive they trick the gullible into giving them goods
so they can live a cosy life.

You are useless, go away, dammit!

* All of the above

...OUCH, dammit!

Have a great day fellow readers!


